In this section, we are going to have
a look at how to authenticate and
authorize requests to our
Quarkus microservices.
Of course, authentication and authorization
are two sides of the same coin.
In authentication, we establish trust
into with regard to identity of
the subject we are engaged in
conversation with and
then in authorization
we take that further.
And once we have established that the
identity is what it claims to be,
we make sure that the client
is actually authorized,
so permitted to perform the operations
that are trying to perform.
In this setting, then authentication is
obviously a prerequisite
for authorization.
Now, in a monolithic application,
authorization and authentication are
typically concerned with securing
user facing APIs in a
microservices based application.
Such concerns effect actually
every part of the system,
each individual microservice would need
to be an authenticating microservice
and of course, would have to
authorize any requests coming in.
OpenID Connect is an authentication
and authorization layer
that is added to the OAuth
version 2.0 protocol.
And it actually makes it quite easy
to perform authorization
and authentication as well
in web services.
The protocols basically create a
token, an authenticating token
whenever a user authenticates against
the OIDC server, any OpenID
Connect combined server can do that.
And the user then includes the
token in any subsequent request
for service aimed at
obviously our microservices.
So essentially the workflow is like this.
The client, which will eventually
require access to our Quarkus service,
logs into the OpenID Connect Server
and obtains an authenticating token,
a JSON web token as it's also called.
And then when it requests service
from a Quarkus application,
it includes the token with
the request as a header.
The Quarkus service can then either
contact the OpenID Connect Server and
authenticate the token as being
something that actually was
issued by the OIDC server.
The OpenID Connect server
then returns a response,
validating the token and gives
the roles that the user belongs
to the Quarkus server,
which in turn then takes care
of the authorization as well.
If the request is authorized,
then the Quarkus application
returns a response.
You can easily add OpenID
Connect capabilities to
your Quarkus applications
by simply adding
an extension called OIDC or manually
adding it to pom.xml file, whichever one.
And then configure the
application.properties
file with a number of
OpenID Connect properties.
Now, you need to have
an OpenID Connect compliant
server in your infrastructure.
You need to have configured
that server prior to that
with a client, authenticating client,
which represents your Quarkus application.
You will have been given a
name for that client and
a secret for that client to
introduce to the OIDC service.
So these two bits of information
will be generated in
the OpenID Connect Server
and will be configured for
your Quarkus application using quarkus.oidc.client-
id and quarkus.oidc.credentials.secret attributes.
The third thing you need to
tell your Quarkus application
is how to contact the OIDC server,
which is a property called quarkus.
oidc.auth-server-url.
This URL will contain a specific word,
the first part is probably going to
look very much similar of course,
except the host name and the port /auth/realms/
and then the realm is basically
a group of authentication settings
that is common to a group
of applications that use
the authentication services and an OIDC
server can have any number of realm,
so these 3 would actually
be the important bits of
information that you will have
to provide to your application.
The server URL, including
the REALM_NAME, the client,
the CLIENT_NAME that your application
will use to present itself to
the OIDC server and the CLIENT_SECRET
that it will use to authenticate.
Once you have configured the application.properties file correctly,
you can obtain the Json Web Token in question
whenever you have got
a request coming in
by injecting JsonWebToken
resource in your code.
Or even you can actually inject
a SecurityContext into your methods
by providing a context annotation,
which will give you an instance of
javax .ws.rs.core.
SecurityContext class in your method
whenever you need to work with it.
Other than OIDC, Quarkus can use a
number of authentication providers,
uses authentication extensions for that.
And there are identity
providers such as, for example,
JDBC identity provider, which is
enabled by quarkus-elytron-security-jdbc extension.
There is a quarkus-security -jpa
extension which uses JPA entities to
validate authenticity of your
clients from a data source.
There's an ldap extension
quarkus-elytron-security-
ldap which can authenticate
against an LDAP server.
And ultimately there is a security-properties-file extension,
which simply loads usernames and
passwords from a static file.
So these are identity providers that can
validate the identity that is
associated with a request.
And then we have an HTTPAuthenticationMechanism which is responsible
for extracting the
authentication credentials
from the requests and
ensuring that they are valid.
Sometimes authentication
mechanisms may
delegate that process
to another extension
but essentially, we do have two basic,
two fundamental authentication mechanisms.
The basic authentication and
the form based authentication.
The enablement of those is possible
through quarkus.http.
.auth.basic or
quarkus.http.auth.form.enabled entries.
If you set those true,
then those two identity providers will be,
those two authentication
methods will be available.
Mutual TLS is one other
method of authentication.
It takes the identity from the
client certificate and validates it.
Some additional extensions implementing
authentication mechanism then
would be quarkus-smallrye-jwt
which extracts the identity
from a bearer token,
Json Web Token that is
included in the request.
This extension can actually validate
the token cryptographically and can
provide introspection capabilities.
Which means that if we configure
our application with the public key
of the authority that
issued the web token,
we do not even have to
contact that authority to
be able to validate the token and get
the roles that the user belongs to.
We can actually simply decode or calculate
the checksum of the
Json Web Token
and then use the public
key of the authority to
actually validate cryptographic
identity.
quarkus-oidc enables
the OpenID Connect authentication
workflow that we have
been talking about just before.
It supports the Bearer Token and
Authorization Token, authentication types.
So the first one,
the formal one, is used
for service applications.
The latter one is used
for web application.
And it does rely on quarkus-smallrye-jwt
extension because identity tokens
and Json Web Tokens are
very similar technologies.
Then lastly, we have a
quarkus-elytron-security-oauth2
extension that uses opaque bearer
tokens to validate the identity.
And this extension is still
in technology preview status.
So other approaches such as JWT are
recommended for the time being.
If you need to implement custom
authentication mechanisms or protocols,
you can use the HTTPAuthenticationMechanism
interface to implement
your own protocols or workflows
for which Quarkus does not
provide an existing extension.
And of course, you would then configure
authentication settings by using
corresponding extension properties.
Commonly, those properties
would include the location of
the authenticating server or
the public key of the
authenticating authority and so on.
Such as, for example,
for quarkus-smallrye-jwt
you can inform that extension
where the issuer URL is.
So the Json web token issuer
and you can also tell
it as I just mentioned,
what or how to load the public
key of the issuer in order
to be able to decrypt and
verify Json Web Tokens.
When it comes to authentication,
we have a number of options,
as we have already discussed just now.
Now, once you have established the
identity of the caller or of the client,
we need to be able to authorize
the request that they are making.
Usually a part of the authentication
process will also be the obtaining of
the roles that are associated with
the subject that is invoking
a particular operation.
Now, that means we can
then control access to a method
using Role-Based Access Control.
Security. There is actually a
number of Quarkus specific but also
Java standard annotations that we can use
on our business methods
and our REST methods.
You can see in the following code
example if we want to allow, let's say,
the getAuthenticated method,
which is available by using GET
request @Path /authenticated,
if you want this method to not be
available to unauthenticated users,
but only those that have
actually authenticated,
we simply use the @Authenticated
annotation on the method and that's it.
Everything else is taken
care of by Quarkus.
Similarly, if there is a secured endpoint
which responds to GET requests that
the path of slash secured and it
should be available to admins
only, we can simply say
which roles are allowed.
If there are multiple roles allowed,
this annotation can
also accept an array of roles.
And then if you want to
permit a method to anybody,
you simply use @PermitAll annotation.
If a method should only
be used by internal code,
then there's also denial,
which will obviously deny any and
all requests to particular method.
This is how you can configure
authorization using annotations,
which does require changes to
the source code and recompiling.
You can however, also do that in
the application.properties file.
So you need only to specify specific or
define a specific policy using
quarkus.http.auth.policy
with the policy name and specify which
roles are allowed for that policy.
There are 2 built-in policies,
one is called permit,
the other one is called deny.
But you can also define
as many roles, as
as many policies as you need to and use
any arbitrary combination of roles
that should be affected by the policy.
And then you simply specify which paths
and which request methods
should be using what policy.
So for the secured endpoint,
GET and POST require roles that
are mentioned in policy number 1.
For any request to public
endpoint, everything is permitted
and remember, permit is a
built-in policy. Of course,
the benefits of defining these in
the application.properties file is
that you can change those settings
at runtime and you can enable or disable
any one specific property without
recompiling the source code.
There may be extensions that are
enabled and loaded in
your Quarkus applications
that could have other properties that
control authentication and authorization,
such as, for example,
quarkus.security.
jaxrs.deny-unannotated-endpoints.
If this property is set to true,
then any endpoint in a RESTful
web client
web service, sorry, any endpoint in
a RESTful web service that is not
annotated with security
constraints will be denied.
In addition to annotating
individual methods,
you can also annotate the entire
web service class and in that case,
the security annotation that you provide
on top of the class will apply to
all methods that exist in
that particular class,
unless those methods have their
own security annotations.
And in that case, more specific
annotations override less specific ones.
It is possible to delegate authorization
to an authorization server.
For example, Single Sign On, Red Hat Single Sign On is a service that
enables you to associate users
and groups with resources.
And then authorization
checks can be performed
by the Red Hat SSO server instead
of the application itself.
In this case, the workflow is very similar
to an authenticating only workflow.
So the client would first have to
authenticate against the OpenID
Connect server or some other OIDC
capable server in order to
obtain a Json Web Token. When
it contacts the Quarkus application
which is configured to use or OIDC,
that's the usual, we
authenticate the token,
we receive the validation and the
roles that the user is a member of.
And then in the next step,
we do not have a built-in
policy for authorization.
We simply refer the authorization request,
including the resourceid of
the resource that the client is trying
to access to the authorization server,
which then responds with a yes or no.
If the response is allowed, obviously,
then the request is processed
and returned to the user.
This does simplify application
configuration immensely because it allows
us to keep a central database
of authorization rules.
However, it does create a tight coupling
between a microservice and
an authorization server.
So in many cases just simply resorting to
Json Web Token authorization
with embedded roles
and what we call claims
is the preferred option.
The quarkus-keycloak-authorization extension,
which is building on top
of quarkus-oidc, however,
does allow delegating resource permission
checks to an OIDC server, just
in case you intend on building one
application that uses that approach, right!
Let's have a look at how
this works in practice.
Join us in the next video,
which is the exercise.